# LESSON 21 - TOPIC 5: Searches & Sorts

Accompanying code files:
- N/A

Jump to [Homework](#homework)

---

The good news is that you will not need to know how to implement ANY of these algorithms for the exam. You will, however, be expected to "hand trace" variables in these algorithms for a number of passes, and know what the values of each one are given a set of inputs, so having a basic understanding of how these algorithms work is crucial.

### Insertion Sort

- Insertion Sort is similar to the natural way that people sort a list of numbers, if given the numbers **one at a time**
- By receiving the numbers one at a time, you can easily sort the numbers on the get-go by **placing it where it belongs right away**
- Insertion sort is relatively simple compared to other sorting algorithms, and is best on **very small data sets**
- To envision this algorithm, imagine being given an unsorted list of numbers, reading them one-by-one from left-to-right (without looking ahead, try covering the remaining numbers and revealing as you go!), and placing all the numbers you've seen so far in their right places (without considering the numbers you haven't seen yet).
- Applying this algorithm to an array, `myArray` of 6 numbers (67, 23, 12, 54, 35, 18), might look something like this:

| # Passes | myArray[0] | myArray[1] | myArray[2] | myArray[3] | myArray[4] | myArray[5] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | **67** | 23 | 12 | 54 | 35 | 18 |
| 1 | **23** | **67** | 12 | 54 | 35 | 18 |
| 2 | **12** | **23** | **67** | 54 | 35 | 18 |
| 3 | **12** | **23** | **54** | **67** | 35 | 18 |
| 4 | **12** | **23** | **35** | **54** | **67** | 18 |
| 5 | **12** | **18** | **23** | **35** | **54** | **67** |

*Bold indicates the numbers "seen" so far, i.e. sorted list*

- Did any of the basic algorithms in the previous lesson ring a bell as you did this?

**Implementation**

```java
public class InsertionSort {

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    int[] myArray = {67, 23, 12, 54, 35, 18};
    insertionSort(myArray);
    for (int i : myArray)
      System.out.print(i + "\t");
  }

  public static void insertionSort(int[] arr) {
    for (int j = 1; j < arr.length; j++) {
      int temp = arr[j];
      int index = j;
      while (index > 0 && temp < arr[index - 1]) {
        arr[index] = arr[index - 1];
        index--;
      }
      arr[index] = temp;
    }
  }

}
```

- Notice the use of the **swap algorithm** used in the previous lesson! Now, with referencing the implementation above, try sorting the same array by determining the value of each of the following variables until the array is sorted: `j`, `temp`, `index`, `arr[index]`, `arr[index-1]`, and the condition of the `while` loop. It should end up the same as the table above.

### Selection Sort

- Selection sort involves taking an unsorted list, and **repeatedly taking out the smallest element** in that list, then placing that element to the right of (numerically after) the previous one in a **new sorted list**.
- This might be how a person would sort a list if the entire list was given to them at one go rather than one number at a time.
- Try it again


| # Passes | myArray[0] | myArray[1] | myArray[2] | myArray[3] | myArray[4] | myArray[5] |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | 67 | 23 | 12 | 54 | 35 | 18 |
| 1 | **12** | 23 | 67 | 54 | 35 | 18 |
| 2 | **12** | **18** | 67 | 54 | 35 | 23 |
| 3 | **12** | **18** | **23** | 54 | 35 | 67 |
| 4 | **12** | **18** | **23** | **35** | 54 | 67 |
| 5 | **12** | **18** | **23** | **35** | **54** | 67 |
| 6 | **12** | **18** | **23** | **35** | **54** | **67** |

*Bold indicates sorted list*

**Implementation**

```java
public class SelectionSort {

  public static void main(String[] args) {
    int[] myArray = {67, 23, 12, 54, 35, 18};
    selectionSort(myArray);
    for (int i : myArray)
      System.out.print(i + "\t");
  }

  public static void selectionSort(int[] arr) {
    for (int j = 0; j < arr.length - 1; j++) {
      int index = j;
      for (int k = j + 1; k < arr.length; k++) {
        if (arr[k] < arr[index])
          index = k;
      }
      int temp = arr[j];
      arr[j] = arr[index];
      arr[index] = temp;
    }
  }
}
```

- Notice the use of the **swap algorithm** used in the previous lesson again! Now, with referencing the implementation above, try sorting the same array by determining the value of each of the following variables until the array is sorted: `j`, `index`, `k`, `arr[k]`, `arr[index]`, `temp`, and `arr[j]`, . It should end up the same as the table above.

### Merge Sort
- Merge Sort is a type of **divide-and-conquer** algorithm and uses **recursion**
- It repeatedly divides the numbers into two groups until it cannot do it anymore (this part involves recursion), then it repeatedly merges the smaller groups together, sorting them as it joins the,, until one large sorted group is produced
- Merge Sort is much **more efficient on large data sets** than Insertion Sort or Selection Sort, but it requires **more memory to execute** due to the use of recursion.
- Given this array of numbers (8, 5, 2, 6, 9, 1, 3, 4), you can visualize how merge sort works using the following Diagrams

(insert diagram)

**IMPLEMENTATION**

### Binary Search
- Sequential search is the only search algorithm we've encountered so far, but it is **not very efficient**
- Binary search is the **most efficient** way to search for a target item, **provided the list is already sorted**
- It repeatedly **eliminates half of the search list with each pass** by guessing the middle, and **determining if the guess was too high/low**.
- For example, in the "Guess My Number" game, where someone thinks of a number within a certain range e.g. 1 - 100, you can use this algorithm to get to the answer faster, by repeatedly asking if the middle number is the target number, and asking if it was too high or low, then repeating the process until you reach the number.
- This is much more efficient, than asking the person if the number is 1, 2, 3... and so on. The following diagram depicts the algorithm:

(insert diagram)

**IMPLEMENTATION**

---

In-class questions will be updated soon!

---

**ANSWERS**

In-class question answers will be updated soon!

---

### HOMEWORK
**Assignments**:
- Complete the **Sorting and Searching Question Set**
- Answers will be posted on the Topic 5 assignment answers [issue]().

**Prep for Next Class**:
- N/A
