# LESSON 10 - TOPIC 3: Program Correctness and Testing

Accompanying code files:
- [VendingMachine.java](https://github.com/APComputerScienceA/t3-vm-unit-test-practice/blob/master/src/vending/VendingMachine.java)
- [Drink.java](https://github.com/APComputerScienceA/t3-vm-unit-test-practice/blob/master/src/vending/Drink.java)

Jump to [Homework](#homework)

---

As mentioned before, software testing is so important that there are roles in the software development world solely dedicated to it. Before you ship a product, it is extremely important that you test it rigorously to save a lot of time and effort fixing things later on (especially if really bad things happen if things malfunction e.g. a driverless car), and because clients prefer using a more polished product.

### Program Correctness
- It is important to note that just because a program **passes all the tests** written for it, does not necessarily mean that it is correct.
- This is because it's not possible to test every possible set of input data, which is why it's important to cover all of the **input boundaries**.
- While there are many mathematical techniques used to prove correctness in some cases, you will not be expected to know any of these for the AP exam.
- However, you will need to be able to make **assertions** about the program state at many points during the program execution.

### Assertions
- An **assertion** is a precise predicate (**T/F**) statement about a program at any given point, that indicates if the statement is true at that point of execution.
- The idea is that if the **assertion is true** at one point, then the **program is working correctly** at that point.
- The assertion is the actual part of code in the program that tests the condition of the statement that is **supposed to be true** at that point.
- This condition is known as the **invariant**. In the example below, the invariant during the execution of the for loop is that **i is always less than 10** during the execution of the statements in the for loop.

```java
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  print(i); // for this part of the code, according to the loop invariant, any value that is >= 10 should never be printed
}
```

- Writing correct algorithms involves being able to make accurate assertions about your code.

### Preconditions
- The **precondition** of any piece of code (a method, loop, or block) is a statement of what is **true immediately before execution** of that code.
- In other words, when writing test cases, **you should not need write tests for when the precondition is not met**, because the precondition should have been met before program execution (and you can't test program execution without actually executing the program).
- So when writing tests, preconditions specify the **set-up required** for the test case to be executed successfully (because writing incorrect test methods can create bugs too!)

### Post-Conditions
- The **postcondition** for any piece of code is a statement of what is **true immediately after execution** of the code.
- In other words, your tests should be **testing if the postcondition is met** after code execution.

### Types of Tests
**UNIT TESTS**
- These are usually short methods that test whether or not a **specific method** is working correctly
- These involve **blackbox testing**, i.e. you should know beforehand what the result should be when you run the method with a certain input, even if you don't know how the method should be implemented yet
- These must call the actual method when testing, and at least **one unit test should be written for each case** of possible input data for the method
- If the method produces correct values for **each test case**, it **passes the unit test**.
- The example below is a unit test for the method `getArea`, of the `Circle` class, that produces the area of a Circle object based on its input radius.

```java
public class Circle {

  public double radius;

  /** Constructor for Circle object
    * @param radius is the radius of the circle
    * PRECONDITION: radius is a non-negative number
    * POSTCONIDTION: a Circle object of radius input is created
    */
  public Circle(double radius) {
    this.radius = radius;
  }

  /** @return the radius of the Circle object
    * PRECONDITION: the Circle object being called on exists
    */
  public double getRadius() {
    return this.radius;
  }

  /** PRECONDITION: Circle object exists
    * @return the area of the Circle object based on its radius
    */
  public double getArea() {
    return Math.PI * Math.pow(radius, 2)
  }

}

public class UnitTestForCircle {

  public static void main(String[] args) {

    testGetArea(new Circle(10), 314.15926);
    testGetArea(new Circle(0), 0.0);

  }

  /** Unit test for the getArea method
    * @param c is the Circle object being tested
    * @param answer is the correct answer for when c.getArea() is called
    */
  public static void testGetArea(Circle c, double answer) {

    // Use a tolerance to determine closeness of answer
    double tolerance = 0.0001;

    if (Math.abs(c.getArea() - answer) <= tolerance) {
      System.out.println(c.getRadius() + " passed the test.");
    } else {
      System.out.println(c.getRadius() + " failed the test.")
    }
  }
}
```
- If you run the code above, it should print out `10.0 passed the test.` and `0.0 passed the test.` in the console.

**INTEGRATION TESTS**
- These are used to make sure that **connections to outside resources** are working properly
- E.g. if you are writing software that connects to [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/), then the test that checks if the connection is made correctly is the integration test.

---

### HOMEWORK
**Assignments**:
- Complete the tests for the `VendingMachine.java` and `Drink.java` classes - [INVITATION](https://classroom.github.com/a/kxuqfOjg)
- From the **Program Design & Analysis Question Set**, complete: 10, 12-14.
- Answers will be posted on the Topic 3 assignment answers [issue](https://github.com/alyeffy/AP-CS-A_2018-2019/issues/7).

**Prep for Next Class**:
- Bring laptop for next class
