# LESSON 13 - TOPIC 4: Arrays, Array Lists, Collections, and 2-D Arrays
Accompanying code files:
- N/A

Jump to [Homework](#homework)

---

### Data Structures
- **Data structures** are a collection of data values, the relationships among them, and the functions or operations that can be applied to the data.
- They are a format or storing, managing, and organizing data in computers, that allows for easier access and modification.
- They can be **simple data structures** that only store a single value, such as a String, or **complex data structures**, that can store a list of variables
- For the AP Exam, the 3 data structures that you will be tested on are : the **array**, the **2-D array**, and the **ArrayList**.

### Arrays
- An array is a data structure used to implement a **list object**, where elements in the list are of the **same type**, and the elements can be any **data type**, **primitive** or **object**.
- For an array of **N** elements in Java, **index** values ("subscripts") go from **0** to **N-1**, i.e. for an array `arr`, the elements are `arr[0]`, `arr[1]`, ..., `arr[N-1]`. Any negative value or value exceeding the array length will throw an `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException`.
- In Java, arrays are objects, so the keyword `new` must be used in their creation, and the **size of an array remains fixed** once created.
- However, as with `String` objects, an array reference may be reassigned to a new array of a different size.

(insert graphic)

```java
// The following lines are all equivalent ways of initializing an array
double[] data = new double[25];

double data[] = new double[25];

double[] data;
data = new double[25];

// The statement below will reassign data to a NEW array of length 40, and the memory allocated for the previous data array may be recycled by Java's automatic garbage collection system.
data = new double[40];
```
(insert graphic)

```java
// You can also declare several arrays in a single statement:
int[] intList1, intList2;

int[] arr1 = new int[15], arr[2] = new int[30];
```

- When arrays are declared, the **default values** for elements are automatically initialized to **zero** for the primitive **numeric data types** (`int` and `double`), `false` for **boolean** variables, or to `null` for **object references**.

- You can use the array indices to store certain values at specific positions of the array.
```java
double[] myGPAs = new double[8];
myGPAs[0] = 3.62; // puts 3.62 in slot 0
myGPAs[3] = 3.75; // puts 3.75 in slot 3
```

(insert graphic)

- You can also declare arrays with values in an **initializer list**
```java
// The following lines:
int[] coins = new int[4];

coins[0] = 1;
coins[1] = 5;
coins[2] = 10;
coins[3] = 25;

// are equivalent to the one below:
int[] coins = {1, 5, 10, 25}
// This is the one case where new is not required to create an array.
```

- A Java array has a **final public instance variable** (i.e. a constant), called `length`, which can be accessed when you need the number of elements in the array.
- Remember that `length` is accessed like a DATA FIELD, NOT like a METHOD!

```java
// Traversing Arrays
String[] names = new String[25];

for (int i = 0; i < names.length; i++) { // Remember that i must be less than the number of elements in an array or an error will occur!
  // process
}

// You can also traverse arrays using the for-each loop if you are traversing through ALL elements in an array
for (String name : names) {
  // process
  // Never remove or replace array elements when using a for-each loop!
}
```

- When passing arrays as parameters, they will be passed by **object reference**, so no copy of the array will be made.
- This means that elements of the **actual array** can be accessed and modified.

```java

public static void changeArray(int[] b) {
  for (int i = 0; i < b.length; i++)
    b[i] += 3;
}

int[] list = {1,2,3,4};
changeArray(list);
for (int num : list) {
  System.out.print(num + " ");
}
```

(insert graphic)

- As you can see, passing the array as a parameter changes ALL the values as a list
- However, passing just one element from the array as a parameter has the following result:
```java
public static void changeElement(int n) {
  n += 3;
}
int[] list = {1,2,3,4};
changeElement(list[0])
for (int num : list)
  System.out.print(num + " ");
```
- This is because primitive types are **passed by value**: a copy will be made of the actual value, and erased upon exiting the method

- Finally, arrays can also be used as variables in a Class, or can contain Class objects
```java
public class Deck {

  private int[] deck; // An array of integers
  private Card[] cards; // An array of Card objects

  // additional implementation
}
```

### ArrayLists
- An ArrayList is another data structure capable of storing a list of objects, and offers the following advantages over arrays:
1. **Shrinks** and **grows** as needed in a program (Arrays have a fixed length that is set when created).
2. The **last slot** is always `list.size()-1`, but in partially-filled Arrays, you as the programmer must keep track of the last slot currently in use.
3. **Insertions** or **deletions** can be done with just a **single statement**, and any **shifting of elements is handled automatically**. For Arrays, insertions or deletions require manually-written code to shift elements.
4. It is easier to **print elements** of ArrayLists than Arrays.
- The ArrayList implements the **List Interface**.
- The ArrayList class has the constructor `ArrayList()`, used like this: `List<Integer> list = new ArrayList<Integer>();`

### The List Interface
- Any class that implements the `List<E>` interface: `ArrayList<E>`, is a list of elements of type `E`
- Duplicate elements are allowed in a list
- Elements are indexed, starting from 0
- Lists allow you to:
1. **Access** an element at any position using its **integer index**.
2. **Insert** an element anywhere in the list.
3. **Iterate** over all elements using `ListIterator`

**LIST METHODS**

- `boolean add(E obj)`: appends `obj` to the end of the list. Always returns `true`. Throws an exception if `obj` is not of type `E`
- `int size()`: returns the number of elements in the list
- `E get(int index)`: returns the element at the specified index in the list
- `E set(int index, E element)`: replaces item specified at `index` in the list with specified `element`. Returns the element that was previously at `index`. Throws an exception if `element` is not of type `E`
- `void add(int index, E element)`: inserts `element` at specified `index`. Elements from position `index` and higher have 1 added to their indices. Size of list is incremented by 1.
- `E remove(int index)`: removes and returns the element at the specified `index`. Elements to the right of position `index` now have 1 subtracted from their indices. Size of list is decreased by 1.

### Collections
- The **ArrayList** class is in the Collections API (Application Programming Interface), a library provided by Java. Most of the API is in `java.util`.
- This library gives the programmer access to prepackaged data structures and the methods to manipulate them. The implementations of these **container classes** are invisible and should not be of concern to the programmer, because it works and is reusable.
- All of the collections classes, including **ArrayList**, have the following features in common:
1. They are designed to be both **memory** and **run-time efficient**.
2. They provide methods for **insertion** and **removal** of items.
3. They provide **iteration** over an entire collection.

**Collections Hierarchy and Generics**

- Inheritance is a defining feature of the Collections API, and the interfaces that are used to manipulate the collections specify the operations that must be defined for any container class that implements the interface.
- Collections classes are **generic**, with type parameters. e.g. `List<E>` and `ArrayList<E>` contain elements of type `E`.
- When a generic class is declared, the type parameter is replaced by an actual object type. e.g. `private ArrayList<Flower> flowers;`
- For the example above, the `flowers` list must only contain `Flower` objects, and any attempts to **add objects of other types** will result in a **compile-time error**.
- Since the types of objects in a generic class is restricted, the **elements can be accessed without casting**.
- All of the type information in a program with generic classes is examined at compile time, and after compile time the type information is erased. This feature of generic classes is known as **erasure**. During execution of the program, any attempt at **incorrect casting or comparisons** will lead to **run-time errors**.

## Auto-Boxing and Unboxing
- There are **no primitive types** in collections classes.
- An **ArrayList** must contain **objects**, not types like `double` and `int`.
- Such types are therefore **boxed**, placed in **wrapper classes** like `Integer` and `Double`, **before insertion** into an ArrayList
- **Auto-boxing**: the automatic wrapping of primitive types in their wrapper classes
- To retrieve the numerical value of an `Integer` (or `Double`) stored in an **ArrayList**, the `intValue()` or `doubleValue()` method must be invoked (**unwrapping**)
- Be careful that your program does not auto-unbox `null`, as this will throw a `NullPointerException`.
- As boxing/unboxing is done for you automatically, you do not need to write code for it, increasing readability, but note that since it will still be performed behind the scenes, it contributes to a **longer overall run-time**.
- Therefore it is **more efficient** to assign and access **primitive types** in an **Array**, and try to reserve **ArrayList** for objects
- NOTE: the concept of auto boxing/unboxing will not be tested on the exam, but it is okay for you to this convenient feature in the code you write in the free-response questions.

### 2D Arrays
- Also known as a **matrix**, think of the **2-dimensional array** as an array of arrays (rows) that form a grid.
- If `mat` is a 2-dimensional array, then `mat[i]` will access the **ith row** of the 2D array, and `mat[i][j]` will access the **jth element of the ith row** of the 2D array.
- As with any array, if subscripts are out of range, an `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException` will be thrown.
```java
int[][] table; // table can reference a 2-D array of integers (currently a null reference)

double[][] matrix = new double[3][4]; // matrix references a 3 x 4 array of real numbers, each element is 0.0

String[][] strs = new String[2][5]; // strs references a 2 x 5 array of String objects, each element is null.

// As with regular arrays, you can also use intializer lists (or in this case, a list of lists)
int[][] mat = { {3, 4, 5},  // row 0 = mat[0]
                {6, 7, 8} } // row 1 = mat[1]
```
- The **number of rows** in a 2D array can be accessed using the `mat.length` field.
- The **number of columns** in a row of a 2D array can be accessed using the `mat[x].length` field (i.e. the number of items in the list at row `x` of `mat`)
- Note that this means "jagged" 2-D matrices are possible, where each row can have any number of items, but you can assume that all 2-D arrays on the AP exam are rectangular.

**Traversing 2-D Arrays**
There are 3 common ways to do so, and you should know all of them:
1. **row-column**: for accessing elements, modifying elements that are class objects, or replacing elements. Can be done **row-wise** or **column-wise**.
2. **for-each loop**: for accessing elements or modifying elements that are class objects, but **no replacement**
3. **row-by-row**: for accessing elements, modifying elements that are class objects, or replacing elements. This involves passing each row as a parameter.

```java
// Row-Column Processing to sum all integers in a matrix mat
int sum = 0;
for (int r = 0; r < mat.length; r++)
  for (int c = 0; c < mat[r].length;, c++)
    sum += mat[r][c];

// Row-By-Row Processing to sum all integers in a matrix mat
public int sumArray(int[] arr) {
  // implementation
}

int sum = 0;
for (int[] rowArr : mat)
  sum += sumArray(rowArr);
```
- You can also pass a 2D array as a parameter (e.g. `public int sumMatrix(int[][] mat)`), and it will follow the same above rules as a regular array when it comes to object arrays.

---

In-class questions will be updated soon!

---

**ANSWERS**

In-class question answers will be updated soon!

---

### HOMEWORK
**Assignments**:
- Complete **Arrays and Array Lists** Question Set
- Answers will be posted on the Topic 4 assignment answers [issue](https://github.com/alyeffy/AP-CS-A_2018-2019/issues/10).

**Prep for Next Class**:
- N/A
